Researching Solana Tokenomics on DEXs
Understanding a token’s economics on Solana (e.g. launched via Raydium, Orca, Pump.fun) requires both pre-launch diligence and post-launch on-chain verification. Key steps include pre-launch analysis (whitepapers, token settings, launch method) and post-launch assessment (actual supply, liquidity, authority checks, etc.). Use on-chain explorers and analytics tools to confirm details and spot red flags. Below is a comprehensive guide:
Pre-Launch Evaluation
Whitepaper and Roadmap: Read the project’s documentation carefully. Look for total supply cap, token allocation (team, investors, community, liquidity), vesting schedules, and any promised burn or buyback mechanisms. Verify that stated plans (e.g. token unlock schedules, use cases) are clear and reasonable. For example, many projects lock team tokens for 1–3 years and release them linearly; ensure this matches on-chain data later.
Token Parameters: On Solana, tokens are created via the SPL Token program. Check the mint address on a block explorer (e.g. Solscan). Key things to note are total supply, decimals, mint authority, and freeze authority. A fixed (hard-capped) supply and a revoked (null) mint authority are safer, since an active mint key means more tokens can be created later. The freeze authority (if any) could pause transfers of specific accounts. These details can often be seen in Solscan’s token “Profile” (name, decimals, authority) and are recorded on-chain. Always verify that the mint authority will be disabled or time-locked at launch if the project claims a fixed supply.
Launch Mechanics: Determine how the token will be distributed at launch. On Solana, this could be an IDO via Raydium’s AcceleRaytor, a public mint (Pump.fun or Solanium), an airdrop, or a liquidity farm. For IDOs or fair launches, check the rules: is it first-come-first-served or token-weighted? Are special wallets excluded? Understand if there are any whitelist/vesting requirements. Launchpads or farms often publish rules and allocation percentages (e.g. % allocated to public vs. strategic sale). If possible, examine the smart contracts or ask if a third-party (like Team Finance or Liquifi) manages vesting/lockups. In short, confirm that the intended distribution (public vs. private sale vs. reserves) is transparent and feasible.
Post-Launch On-Chain Assessment
Total vs. Circulating Supply: Use Solscan (or the SPL CLI) to see the total supply of the token (number minted)[1][2]. By tokenomics standards, circulating supply is typically “total supply minus locked or unavailable tokens”[3][4] (e.g. vested tokens, staked tokens, treasury reserves). On-chain, total supply is recorded in the token’s account. Circulating supply may exclude tokens held by vesting contracts or team wallets. Many tokens report these on CoinGecko or the whitepaper, but verify with on-chain data: e.g. if team tokens are locked via a contract, those tokens won’t enter circulation until unlocked.
Holder Distribution: On Solscan’s token page, view the “Holders” list and distribution chart. Large concentration in a few wallets is a warning sign. For example, RugCheck’s analysis highlights that “ownership concentration” can reveal if a handful of accounts hold most tokens[5][6]. If >50% of supply sits in team or unknown wallets, the token is highly centralised. Ideally, a healthy project has a broad holder base or locked allocations. Also check for any obvious “burn” address (Solana’s burn address is often a known null address). If the project claimed token burns, verify that tokens have indeed been irretrievably sent to a burn (often just calling a Burn instruction). In Solscan, you can filter transactions for Burn or unusually transfer to a zero address.
Liquidity Pool (LP) Analysis: Examine the token’s DEX pair (e.g. token/SOL or token/USDC on Raydium or Orca). Check the initial LP amounts by looking at the LP token mint or Raydium’s UI. A balanced pool (e.g. $50k token + $50k SOL) is typical; an odd ratio or extremely thin liquidity is risky. The pool’s details (total value locked, token:SOL ratio) can often be viewed on Raydium’s site or by finding the pool account on Solscan. Also verify that any LP tokens were locked (e.g. through Team Finance) for a reasonable period. Birdeye’s analysis specifically flags “locked or burned liquidity” to prevent rug pulls[7]. In practice, look for large liquidity removal transactions after launch – this is a red flag.
Mint & Freeze Authority Checks: Confirm the token’s mint authority on Solscan. If the mint authority has not been set to the null key, the developers could mint new tokens at any time. RugCheck and other scanners check for “unauthorized minting capabilities or hidden admin privileges” in token contracts[8]. If you find an active mint authority, treat the supply as potentially unlimited. Similarly, a non-null freeze authority could allow freezing token transfers of holders. These are often visible on the token’s Solscan page (“Authority” field) or through custom programs (Solana recently added token extensions, but many tokens still use the basic SPL with fixed authorities).
Transactions & Burns: Scan recent transactions to see if tokens are being minted, burned, or transferred between key wallets. Authentic projects sometimes implement deflationary mechanics (e.g. burning a portion of fees). If so, Solscan’s transaction list will show those burns. For example, Raydium’s tokenomics note that a portion of trading fees are used to buy back or burn RAY[9]. Verify that such actions happen on-chain as claimed. Also check for suspicious transactions: huge sales by team wallets, or tokens sent to stealth addresses. Any promised vesting should manifest as tokens moving from a vesting contract to circulating supply over time; absence of these patterns may mean promised schedules are not enforced on-chain.
Circulating Calculation: Remember that Solana has staking: staked SOL is effectively locked and not circulating. If tokenomics involve staking (e.g. staking SOL for token rewards), separate that out. Use the definitions: total supply = minted – burned[3]; circulating ≈ total minus tokens in vesting/staking/treasury[4]. Always cross-check with independent trackers (CoinGecko, CoinMarketCap) but validate on-chain where possible. Solscan’s token analytics can report “circular supply” metrics too[1].
Meme Coins vs Utility Tokens
Memecoins: These are tokens launched mostly for viral/community appeal (e.g. DOGE, SHIB, or Solana’s BONK). They typically do not have intrinsic technical utility – their value comes from hype, social media buzz, and community-driven speculation[10]. As a result, memecoins often have extreme volatility (“high-risk, high-reward”[11]) and can lack detailed whitepapers or locked tokenomics. Investors in memecoins rely on community momentum and quick flips rather than fundamentals. In evaluating a memecoin, focus on safety measures (locked liquidity, reputable launch, transparent supply) because fundamental use is minimal.
Utility Tokens: These serve a functional role (e.g. governance, access to a platform, payment of fees). They usually have more structured tokenomics: defined use-cases, revenue or fee-sharing mechanisms, staking rewards, etc. For example, a DeFi protocol’s utility token might have parts of fees used for buyback or distribute to stakers. Utility tokens tend to be targeted at long-term holders, so their token release schedules and inflation rates are more stable. When researching utility tokens, emphasize their promised utilities and whether they align with on-chain activity. Unlike memecoins, utility tokens are valued for “real-world problems solved”[12]. (That said, the line can blur: some meme projects try to add utilities over time.)
On-Chain Analysis Tools
Solscan (Explorer): The primary block explorer for Solana. Use it to inspect any token or transaction. Its token pages show total supply, decimals, mint/freeze authority, holders list, transfer history, and even a “rich list”. Solscan also highlights tokenomics metrics: circulating supply and recent token movements[1]. For example, Solscan’s documentation notes it “tracks tokenomics, such as market cap, circulating supply, and recent token movements”[1]. It can reveal if a token’s mint authority was changed, how many tokens were burned, and which wallets hold most of the supply.
RugCheck (SolanaTracker): A specialized tool to detect scams on Solana. RugCheck automatically analyzes a token by checking liquidity pool stats, holder distribution, contract code, and trading patterns[5][13]. It looks for things like unauthorized minting capability or hidden admin rights in the token code[8], abnormal liquidity pool behavior, and concentration of ownership[14]. The platform produces a “risk score” for tokens. Use it to quickly spot obvious red flags (e.g. 0 liquidity locked, single holder >90%, or contract not verified). Note that no tool is foolproof, but RugCheck’s analysis (“liquidity pool analysis, ownership concentration, contract verification”) is a good starting point[5].
Birdeye (birdeye.so): A real-time analytics dashboard akin to DEXScreener for Solana. It has features like a Launch Explorer (new tokens tracker) and detailed liquidity analytics. Birdeye shows token price charts, trading volume, holder count, and TVL per pool[15][7]. It can flag “locked” vs “burned” liquidity – warning users if a pool’s liquidity is easily removable[7]. Birdeye’s “Launch Explorer” helps find newly minted tokens and assesses metrics (market cap, liquidity, holder distribution) to identify healthy launches[16]. It also highlights top gainers and whale trades. As a security measure, its analytics spot shallow pools or sudden volume spikes that often precede a rug pull[7][17]. (An AInvest article notes Birdeye “flags locked liquidity and shallow pools” as a key risk mitigation[7].)
DexScreener/Photon: Community tools for viewing live price charts and liquidity across AMMs. DexScreener (and Photon SOL for Solana) can be used to see real-time prices, volume, and liquidity pool depth for any token pair. They are useful to confirm that the trading behavior on a token is normal (no sudden dumps, or abnormal spreads). They are less about tokenomics and more about market activity.
Team Finance & Liquifi (Vesting Tools): While these are token-launch services, they also allow on-chain token lockups. If a project used Team Finance, its vesting schedule, liquidity lock, or token lock can be publicly viewed through the Team Finance dashboard. For example, Team Finance explicitly provides “liquidity locks”, “team token & NFT locks”, and “token vesting” features[18]. Similarly, Liquifi automates vesting and lockups[19]. If a token’s docs claim lockups via these, you can cross-check by looking up the project on those platforms (often by token name or by known lock IDs). This ensures that allocated tokens (to team/advisors) are actually locked on-chain as promised.
On-Chain Query (SPL CLI/API): For advanced verification, use Solana’s command-line or RPC to query token info. For example:
spl-token accounts [TOKEN_MINT] 
spl-token supply [TOKEN_MINT]
These commands list all token accounts and total supply. You can programmatically verify supply or find all token balances of specific wallets. This is beyond casual analysis but ensures no explorer caching or UI mistake.
Core Tokenomics Components
Total Supply & Cap: This is the max tokens that can ever exist. It may be hard-coded (e.g. 1,000,000) or potentially uncapped (if mint authority is permanent)[2]. Confirm on-chain that total supply equals what was promised. If the token is inflationary, check the emission schedule (e.g. “X tokens per block” or “linear release over Y years”). Raydium’s docs, for instance, state a 555 million RAY cap with ~1.9m RAY emitted per year from its mining reserve[20][21].
Circulating Supply: As noted, this excludes locked or reserved tokens[4]. It is not directly stored on-chain, but can be derived. If tokens are vested in a contract (e.g. Team Finance), then those tokens are not circulating. Also exclude tokens used for staking (since staked SOL isn’t free-floating). Comparing circulating vs total highlights how much supply is locked up.
Token Allocation: Typically, a project divides supply among categories. Common splits include Team/Advisors, Investors, Community/Airdrops, Ecosystem Incentives, and Liquidity. For example, Raydium’s tokenomics allocated 20% to a vested team pool, 6% to community/seed (also vested), 8% to liquidity, etc.[22]. Always review these percentages: if the team share is large (say >20%), ensure those tokens are locked. If public/community share is tiny, it may indicate a pump scheme. Any major allocation should match wallet patterns on-chain.
Vesting & Unlocks: Allocated tokens for founders or investors should have vesting. Check if those tokens were indeed locked (e.g. on Team Finance) and whether the vesting timeline is being honored. Solana doesn’t enforce vesting by default, so trust hinges on on-chain locks. Confirm that planned unlocks (e.g. “10% monthly after 6 months”) happened by watching the vesting contract’s outputs.
Burn Mechanisms: Some projects burn tokens to reduce supply (deflation). Common on Solana is a manual burn (using the SPL Burn instruction) or a burn address. If tokenomics promises burns (e.g. a % of fees burned), verify in the transaction history that tokens were indeed removed from supply (see Burn TXs on Solscan). Without proof of actual burns, promised deflation is merely a claim.
Transaction Taxes/Fees: On blockchains like BSC, tokens often have built-in transfer taxes. On Solana’s SPL standard, there is no native tax. Any tax would require a custom program. If the token’s docs claim, say, 1% of every transfer goes to a treasury, check if the token is a standard SPL or uses a special program. In practice, most Solana tokens do not have automated tax/tokensomic features, so you’ll see full amounts transferred. If a tax exists, it will show up as the transfer sending a smaller amount than expected (inspect the transaction on Solscan).
Liquidity & Farms: Incentives often come from farming rewards. If a project launched a liquidity mining program (via Raydium farms), check how many tokens are emitted per epoch. These are usually on-chain farm contracts – you can find them on Raydium’s site or in their docs. Confirm that reward tokens come from a pre-defined reserve (not new minting beyond cap).
Enforcement & Transparency: In general, tokenomics are only enforceable on-chain if implemented by smart contracts. Team vesting and liquidity locks can be enforced by programs; otherwise, the project relies on trust. Verify all enforceable elements on-chain (locks, vesting, fee mechanisms) and be skeptical of any “promise” not backed by code or blockchain evidence.
Key Risk Indicators
Watch out for the following red flags when analyzing Solana tokens:
Unlimited Mint Authority: If the token’s mint authority is not revoked, the team can mint infinite tokens. RugCheck explicitly checks for hidden mint privileges[8]. Always verify on Solscan that the mint authority is set to a null address after launch.
Whale/Team Concentration: If a single wallet or a few wallets hold a majority of tokens, they can crash the price by selling. RugCheck’s ownership analysis alerts to “suspicious distribution” by large holders[6]. On-chain, see if vesting contracts or team wallets hold large locked balances.
Shallow Liquidity or Unlocked LP: Low liquidity depth means even small sells push price down. Birdeye and RugCheck flag shallow pools. Also check if LP tokens were locked; if not, a developer could withdraw liquidity (rug pull). Some tools will indicate “locked liquidity” vs not[7].
Suspicious Airdrops or Vesting (Hype Tricks): Some projects air-drop tokens to influencers or wallets to simulate a strong holder base. On-chain, these appear as many small transfers at launch. This is not inherently bad, but check if those wallets are real community members or cold wallets. Similarly, “locked” tokens might actually be just promised, not enforced.
Mismatch between Docs and On-Chain: If the whitepaper says certain lockups or burns, confirm them on-chain. A frequent scam tactic is claiming a burn/lock while omitting to actually do it. Use explorers to see if those transactions occurred.
High Inflation: If the token has an inflationary issuance (e.g. new tokens per block/year), ensure it’s sustainable. Excessive annual inflation dilutes holders. Look for an “inflation schedule” in docs and see if on-chain minting matches that schedule.
No Real Utility (for Utility-claiming projects): If a token brands itself as “utility” but you see no on-chain usage (no contracts, no transactions aside from transfers), be wary. Utility tokens should have some protocol activity driving their demand.
Rapid Sell-offs: Use Solscan or Birdeye’s trade analysis to spot if the founders or big holders immediately sold at launch (often within minutes or hours). This is a classic rug sign.
Hype without Substance: Be extra cautious with memecoins: 99% fade quickly[10]. Even with good tokenomics, memecoins rely on fickle social trends. Check community trust and past behavior of the team (if known) – though this goes beyond on-chain, it matters.
Summary: Always cross-check every claim with on-chain data. Use Solscan for core token info, RugCheck for red-flag scanning, Birdeye/Dexscreener for market data. Understand whether the token is meant to have real utility or is a speculative meme. Look carefully at supply allocation and vesting – ideally visible and locked on-chain – and ensure liquidity is adequate and secure. By combining careful whitepaper review with these on-chain tools and indicators, you can thoroughly analyze a Solana DEX-launched token’s economics and safety profile.